THE BRITISH ISLES,

wherein are the Kingdoms of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND.

THE BRITISH ISLES under one and the same name, form a body of many and divers Isles, situate in the ocean, between the Northern and Western parts of Europe; Of these Isles, there is one very large, another of a less extent, and a great many small ones; the greatest was first called ALBION, ab albis rupibus, from its white cliffs; afterwards for its excellency BRITANNIA MAJOR, and now ENGLAND, and the next or lesser was first called HIBERNIA, and now IRELAND.

The Great Isle comprehends two Kingdoms, ENGLAND and SCOTLAND, this making the most Northern part of the Isle, that the most Southern, and approaches so near to France, that from Dover to Calais the passage is not above Seven or eight Leagues; and all the Southern Coast of England is not distant from Picardy, Normandy, and Bretagne above 15, or 20, or 30 Leagues.

IRELAND is West of Great Britain, and makes one Kingdom, The little neighboring Isles are comprehended under one or the other of the three Kingdoms, according to the contiguity with them.

All these Isles have received great changes in their Governments since they were first known. They were first possessed by divers people, independant the one upon the other, before the Roman times upon record, who possest themselves of the most Southern part of Great Britain, now called England; and for some times a part of Ireland, but never had any thing to do in Scotland.

After the Romans, the English Saxons possessed the better part, and had been thus divided by them into seven several Kingdoms, to wit,

1. The Kingdom of KENT, where is only the County of Kent.

2. The Kingdom of the SOUTH SAXONS, which contained the Counties of Surrey and Sussex.

3. The Kingdom of the EAST ANGLES, which contained the Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire.

4. The Kingdom of the EAST SAXONS, which contained the Counties of Essex, Middlesex, and part of Hertford.

5. The Kingdom of the WEST SAXONS, which contained the Counties of Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, Wilshire, Hampshire, Dorset, Berks, &c.

6. The Kingdom of the NORTHUMBERS, which contained the Counties of Yorkshire, Lancashire, Durham, Cumberland, Westmerland, and Northumberland.

7. The Kingdom of MERCIA, which contained the Counties of Huntingdonshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, Lincolnshire, Oxfordshire, Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Staffordshire, Cheshire, Shropshire, and Herefordshire.

EGBERT the first King of the race of the WEST SAXONS who subdued these several Kingdoms of the Saxon Heptarchy, styled himself the first Monarch,

---

THE BRITISH ISLES.

and commanded that the South-part of Scotland should be called Lothian, from the death of Waldeof who was decimated. Somewhat before his Septentrionale part bore no unlike violence flood upon the Northland, and though they were at length quieted by the strength of the English Kings of England, which was sometimes held by the Danes, and sometimes by the Scots, till it was united to the Kingdom by Edward III from Harold, and established the Monarchy, which hath ever since continued.

The supreme Britannic dominion the Strangers went retired into the most Hilly part of the Country, which is now called the Principality of Wales, where they had their several Princes, and not only defended themselves against all Invasions, but were very buxom once to the English Quarters, till at length Edward the First united it fully to the English Crown; he caused to prepare the Royal possessions of the Son of Wales, a Title which hath ever since been conferred on the eldest Son of the King of England.

ENGLAND is divided into several Shires or Hundreds of Tribes and Suburbs, being drawn from the one to the other side, as God sees it encompassed with Waters, and stretches in length from the sea to Tynemouth near Berwick upon Tweed, a Town on the Confines of Ireland, about 440 miles; and in breadth from St. David's in South-west to the Sea-side near London about 300 lbs. Whole Circuit being near 2000 Miles.

It may be divided into 3, though unequal parts, to wit, ENGLAND, the VALLEYS separated each from the other by the Severn, and a Line drawn to the Trent; But the more certain and precise division was by a huge Ditch, which being the Instance of the Roman Saxons, reached to the Thames, from the aforesaid St. David's, the delineation following the sea 160 miles long, made by King Offa of Mercia, by the advice (as the Story goes) of the Kings Council. The Ditch, called Offa's Dyke, and William, was to pass his ground at Weapon, on pain of Death; and may again be sub-divided into Shires or into Ferts, according 

as these shires are allotted for the Circuits of the Ordinary Judges.

This Kingdom was first divided into Shires by King Alfred the Second, who likewise every Year, stood; that 3 of the Chief Judges should in each Circuit inspect the Terms of each County to hear grievous-time Causes, and Administer Justice for the state of the People; the one of these Judges was to sit on Criminal, or Controversy, and the other for the decay of such perverse behaviour, party and party, which Caernia is still observed and kept. Again, every Shire or County is subdivided into Hundreds, in which are a large number of Townships, Burghs, or Tithings.

King Alfred was the first who ordained the Division of Shires, Hundreds or Towns, that every English-man might live at home, as a Leige Subjects, out of which he was not to move without Security; and if a man were accused on his Shire, he was forthwith, to bring forth of his Surety, one of the same Hundred or Tribe, to answer the same, and if not accused, whether he hath given a true surety, to make an escape; then Security or to give upon the Hundred or Tribe for the King. He also appointed in every Shire a Vice-Comite, that is a Sheriff, whose office was (as to this day is) to look after the Peace and welfare of the Shire for which he was chosen, and so do and to several things for the King, And each Sheriff were now generally chosen out of the Chief-County of the County.

Moreover, King Edward the Third ordained in every Shire certain Town Places of the Peace, whose duties are to look after the disorders that arise in the Shire or Hundred in which they reside, and to punish Offenders, which are still made use of.

Archbishop Anselm of Canterbury, in A.D. Christ 1093, was the first that began to divide England into Parishes. And now as it is divided into Jurisdiction of Shires, so the English Law is a Province of Archbishoprics, viz. Canterbury (which is the chief) and York: and under these are 34 Suffragan Bishops, of which 3 of Cornwall with their Pillars and the Tent is of the North that belongs to York, which the following Table will make appear.

---

THE BRITISH ISLES.

A CATALOGUE of the ARCHBISHOPS, and BISHOPS of ENGLAND and WALES, together with what COUNTIES are under their Jurisdiction, and what PARISHES are in each DIOCESE.

NAMES of the present BISHOPS, June 1668. Counties under their Jurisdiction. Appropriated Revenues, as in the King's Books, or ancient Valor in £.s.d.

1. His Reverend Father in God Dr. Gilbert Sheldon, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and part of Kent 1400
2. The Reverend Dr. Richard Sterne, Lord Arch-Bishop of York, and Nottinghamshire 951
3. The Reverend Dr. Humphrey Henchman, Lord Bishop of that See, and part of Middlesex 1097
4. The Reverend Dr. George Morley, Lord Bishop of Winchester, Hampshire, and part of Surrey 1253
5. The Reverend Dr. Peter Mew, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, Somersetshire 366
6. The Reverend Dr. Walter Jones, Lord Bishop of Hereford, Herefordshire 477
7. The Reverend Dr. Robert Morgan, Lord Bishop of Bangor, Caernarvanshire, Isle of Anglesey, Merionethshire, and part of Montgomery 107
8. The Reverend Dr. John Dolben, Lord Bishop of Rochester, part of Kent 305
9. The Reverend Dr. Seth Ward, Lord Bishop of Salisbury, Wiltshire, and part of Dorset 1016
10. The Reverend Dr. John Gauden, Lord Bishop of Exeter, Devonshire 1302
11. The Reverend Dr. William Piers, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, Somersetshire 366
12. The Reverend Dr. Henry Glemham, Lord Bishop of St. Asaph, Part of Flintshire, and part of Denbighshire 231
13. The Reverend Dr. John Gunning, Lord Bishop of Ely, Cambridgeshire, Isle of Ely 1431
14. The Reverend Dr. Anthony Sparrow, Lord Bishop of Norwich, Norfolk, and part of Suffolk 1073
15. The Reverend Dr. Edward Reynolds, Lord Bishop of Norwich, Norfolk, and part of Suffolk 1073
16. The Reverend Dr. Ralph Brideoake, Lord Bishop of Chichester, Sussex 500
17. The Reverend Dr. William Lucy, Lord Bishop of St. David's, Pembrokeshire, and part of Cardiganshire 609
18. The Reverend Dr. Brian Walton, Lord Bishop of Chester, Cheshire, Lancashire, part of Shropshire, and part of Yorkshire 967
19. The Reverend Dr. Benjamin Laney, Lord Bishop of Lincoln, Lincolnshire, Leicestershire, Huntingdonshire, Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire, Bedfordshire, part of Warwickshire, and part of Northamptonshire 1008
20. The Reverend Dr. Accepted Frewen, Lord Archbishop of York, and Nottinghamshire 951
21. The Reverend Dr. John Warner, Lord Bishop of Rochester, part of Kent 305
22. The Reverend Dr. Robert Skinner, Lord Bishop of Oxford, Oxfordshire 963
23. The Reverend Dr. Thomas Henchman, Lord Bishop of London, part of Middlesex and part of Essex 967
24. The Reverend Dr. Robert Frampton, Lord Bishop of Gloucester, Gloucestershire 391
25. The Reverend Dr. George Hall, Lord Bishop of Chester, Cheshire, Lancashire, part of Shropshire, and part of Yorkshire 967
26. The Reverend Dr. Nathaniel Crewe, Lord Bishop of Durham, Durham, Northumberland, Isle of Man 3552

---

THE BRITISH ISLES.

NAMES of the present BISHOPS, June 1668. Counties under their Jurisdiction. Parishes in each Dioces. Appropriated Revenues, as in the King's Books, or ancient Valor in £.s.d.

16. The Reverend Dr. Thomas Lamplugh, Lord Bishop of Peterborough, Northamptonshire, and Rutlandshire 493 91
17. The Reverend Dr. Thomas Wood, Lord Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, Staffordshire, Worcestershire, Derbyshire, part of Warwickshire, and part of Shropshire 177 95
18. The Reverend Dr. Anthony Palliser, Lord Bishop of Carlisle, Cumberland, and part of Westmorland 93 95
19. The Reverend Dr. Samuel Parker, Lord Bishop of Oxford, Oxfordshire 963 108
20. The Reverend Dr. Anthony Sparrow, Lord Bishop of Norwich, Norfolk, and Suffolk 1214 325
21. The Reverend Dr. William Nicholson, Lord Bishop of Gloucester, Gloucestershire 267 125
22. The Reverend Dr. Herbert Croft, Lord Bishop of Hereford, Herefordshire 477 195
23. The Reverend Dr. Edward Pocock, Lord Bishop of Chichester, Sussex 500 147
24. The Reverend Dr. John Dolben, Lord Bishop of Rochester, part of Kent 305 97
25. The Reverend Dr. Thomas Barlow, Lord Bishop of Lincoln, Lincolnshire, Leicestershire, Huntingdonshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, part of Warwickshire, and part of Northamptonshire 1008 577

Besides Peculiar in the Diocels of Canterbury 

---

According to this Division of England and Wales there are in the aforesaid Dioceses 9928 Parishes; of which there are 1473 Parishes in the Kingdom of England and 115 Parishes in Wales.

England is a Kingdom of a perfect and happy composition, wherein the King hath his full Prerogative; the Nobility and Gentry enjoy good respect, and they receive civil and safe life, in the enjoying the Benefit of the Happy Laws, by their Labours and Endeavours got a blessing that few Countries can boast of, Neither is it subject to the Imperial or any other Laws, other Laws, other than her ancient Laws, which is a Municipal or Common-Law, and proper for this Nation.

As concerning the Courts of Judicature, they may be comprehended under 3 heads; to wit, Ecclesiastical, Temporal, and one mixt of both, and under these are comprehended all the Courts of Judicature.

The two principal Courts for Ecclesiastical Affairs, are, 1. The Synods or Convocations of the Clergy, and this is in the times of Parliaments; and, 2. The Prerogative Synod, and is kept in both Provinces of York. Besides which, there is a Court belonging to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and to Arches next to the city of the same by order, the Courts of Arches, the Court of Audience, the Court of Faculties, the Prerogative Court, and the Court of Review.

The Courts for Temporal Affairs are of two kinds, viz for Laws, and such are the Courts of King-bench, Common-Pleas, Exchequer, Star-chamber, Court of Wards, &c., to all which belong peculiar Judges, with divers of-justices to each Court, a. For Equity, and such are the Courts to which all, Appeals, Requests, &c., commonly go to the ecclesiastical Judges, and likewise have their sub-offices.

The next and last of the Courts, and mist of both, is the greatest, and most eminent and powerful, and is the High Court.

---

The BRITISH ISLES.

The High Court of Parliament, consisting of the Kings, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons which are elected Knights and Burgesses; which stand represent the Body of all England. And this High Court hath Soveraign and Sacred Authority in Repealing, Expounding, Making and Confirming Laws, and in briefe, in all Causes which may concerne either the safety and welfare of the State, or any private person, of what degree or quality soever, And this Court of Parliaments is not held at set and certain times, but it is summoned by the King by Writ at his pleasure; and as of occasions doth require for the good and peace of the Nation.

ENGLAND is blest with a sweet and temperate air, the Summer (by reason of constant rain, gentle winds) the abating the heats, and the thickness of the Air, with frequent showers in the Winter, so mitigating the cold, that neither the heats of the Summer nor extream colds in the Winter, nor the Winter burnings them.

The whole Country is extreamly fertile, abounding with Barley, Oats, Peas, Beans, Hemp, Flax, divers sort of Pulse, Acorns, Taras, &c. also in each Pastures, with innumerable quantities of Cattle, as Beef and Mutton, to much that the English are observed to eat more Flesh than any Nation in the World. Here is great increase and plenty of divers sorts of Fowle, both tame and wilde, as Pullaine, Geese, Turkeys, Pigeons, Ducks, Teale, Heathers, Partridge, Woodhen, Snipes, Plovers, with hundreds of other sorts too tedious to name. Its Swines are esteemed good, delicate, and wholsome as well in Summer as in Winter, though not accustomed to the hough-fatten. Its Sea and Rivers are sufficiently provided with variety of excellent Fish, as Salmon, Carps, Trouts, Pikes, Tenches, Eels, Flounders and Smelts, also with Shrimps, Oysters, Muscles, Lobs-ters, Partins, Plaise, Soles, and Cardinall and lastly Herrings and Pilchers, which bring a great and considerable profit to the Kingdom, it being a Staple Commodity, and finds good vent in Spain, France, and other Countryes, for which we ready in exchange sundry good and Staple Commodities. In the bowels of the Earth are store of rich Mines, of Lead, Tin, Iron, Copper-stone, and most of all Stone, and from the Sea-Coal, especially from those of Lead, Tin and Coals, exceeding great pro

fit is drawn. Great advantage is made by Butter and Cheese. The whole Isle is well furnished with Orchards and Gardens, in which are excellent Fruits, as Apricocks, Peaches, Nectarines, Pomegranates, Grapes, Apples and Pears, free to the palate, of an excellent staler and made into both drinks of a grateful Tast as Cyder and Perry. Also Mellons, Cucumbers, Radishes, as also divers sorts of Herbs and Pot-herbs very good, as are also the Roots which are Sparage, Carrets, Turnips, Parsnips, Harti-choaks, Collyflowers, Cabbage, Lettice, Leeks, Chives, Radish, Thistles, Carduns, Sorril, Rues, Laud, Thy and Fennell, Cow-slipps and enough; and Shrubs, Hearbs, Flowers, Grain, Pulses, Fruits, and Shrubs. Padly is another prized object in our Kingdom, is used, our Beef, not only for its fineness, but for its plenty, which affords Cheapside for several Nations, The Husbandman's toil, Kersey and the like. Fishplays, dressed are of excellent making, perhaps might be as rude as any other. 

The Woods are also so full, so very good, and so well ordered, as the like are not to be found in any other Nation, so beneficial, in matters of Warfare they be courageous, and of an prudent and advised mind high beams sufficiency. In device in council found and Zealous, And without question there are others of the same name. The English may be held as excellent for the use of God, and of the World, either for ingenuity, piety, the Knowledge of arts and Sciences, the erecting of Arts or what else belongeth to the compleating of a Gentleman. And as for the Military, they are of a ready and approaching, of a good disposition, and naturally loving and constant to their Motherland, God and the King. 

The Women of Honour have observed, according to which they take place, they The Precedence under three who heads, viz, Nobles Minorers, and such are Countesses, Marquises and Knights; and Nobilities. Wives and are exempt by degrees and compass, Earls Marquesses and Barons, and the Supreme, His Sacred Majesty, who is the fountain of Honour.

--- 

The BRITISH ISLES.

ENGLAND may boast of many things above other Nations, viz: That it had the first Christian King in the World. That here hath been more Parliaments and Martyrs of Kings and Princes than in any Kingdom in Europe. That the first King which renounced the Popes Supremacy, was King Henry the Eighth and the first that Wrote to prove that Popes-Chair, was King John. The Land there are more Parks, Forests, and Chases, than in any Kingdom in Europe, in which are excellent Deere, and other Game. But above all its Wooden Walls, the Ships, which are not onely a Safety to the Nation, but a terrour unto Strangers.

The Bridges of England are said to be those of Lud, the chiefe of which are Stone and Wooden, further and its use, that before we pass Essex, the Isles and Trial of the several Countys, or Shires of England, as afore laid down, and that the sordid fit for the ancient Kingdome of the East, will be the ancient Kingdome of the East.

The KINGDOME of KENT, where is only the COUNTY of KENT.

KENT, a County of a large extent; and generally of a rich and fertile soil, plentifully provided of Corn and other Grains; Cattle, Fowls, and Fish, most chiefly in Herrings, but also in other sorts, which maketh its Eating and Not-Sea Fish plenty.

This County hath for it, to bear the Title of the Peniſula of the Heptarchy, and the King peculiar King to it self, a thing that no other County in England had; neither was it ever subdued by Conquest, but yielded upon Articles, and to keep their Antient Customs, one of which is That of the Gavel-kind.

This County is enriched with a Citty and 7 Corporations; and it is strengthened with Castles, graced with a great many Stately Houſes beautified with many Parkes, and well replenished with Loyall Subjects, free from Tumults, and very garrishned with faire Townes. It is a place of good Trading, well frequented and inhabited; and the more, by reason of its vicinity to France. As to its chief places, I shall first treate of those that are seated on, or on the side River of Tamisen with those on the River, and to conclude the whole within Land. And then the first shall be Deptford, which is a Town populous, and well frequented by Seamen for its Mercat, the resort of most account, and where the Kings Ships are built; and old ones repaired; as also for its brave Galleries for Admiralties for the Navy; a Grog-bridge, a place of great delight, a faire and large Town, well frequented by Gentry and adorned with a (once noble stately) Palace of the Kings, which is now a repairing; adjoyning to which is a pleasant Parke, where once stood a small Castle.

But more for delight then strength, and more it was that Queen Elizabeth's specled on her first Breath. 3. Dartford, seated on the River Darent, not far from the Thames; a large and well frequented Market-Town. 4. Gravesend, a well-known Ferry, being the continual landing-place for Seamen and Strangers, before they come to London; Ships likewise that use practise of taking Ships to, and their relading the Block-houses, the once continued the other in golfs of watch on this side, and securdies the passage into the Thames. 5. Sandwuch, One of the Cinque Ports. To it, a place of good strength, but not much frequented by reason of the ill-commodiousness of its Harbour. 6. Dover, a place of great strength, as well by Nature, as Art, being faced by two high Cliffs, and defended by a strong Castle. 

And other Fortifications, loftily seated, commanding both Sea and Country there abouts; it is most famous for the commodiousness of its Haven, strength of the Town; for its being one of the chiefe Ports, and for its ready and short passage into France; there from its Landing and trading being well frequented. 7. Rye, situated, being, on times past a noted place, being one of the Cinque-ports; but so now not much frequented, its Haven being choaked up. 8. Hastings, an Antient Town seated upon the Sea, commonly termed in a Marsh so called; at about 14 Miles in length, and 8 in breadth, now more famous for the fertility of the place, then either for the goodness of the Sea, Harbour, or for the late land-fights. These shewed in, as also for its unhealthfulness; and theile are the chief places which may

--- 

THE BRITISH ISLES.

may be termed Sea, or Port-Towns. Now follows those within-Land; and first with Canterbury, an antient, and once famous City, it is beautified with stately Cathedrals, (a thing high which much make its pristine beauty, by reason of the late unhappy War) seated in the midst of the City, and within its bounds are several fair Edifices, belonging to the Dean and Prebendaries. The city is compassed with a Mate and Wall, on which is several Gate-houses, or Watch-Towers, built of Free-stone; its Suburbs are indifferently large, in which, and within the Walls are 15 or 16 Parishes.

It is Dignified with an Archiepiscopal See, and Governed by a Mayor and Common Aldermen, who are clothed in Scarlet; but of the Conventicle of the late Sessions, besides what is daily sold by Shop-keepers, there are weekly two Markets, viz., 3. called, both good Market-Towns, and 4. Sitting on the River Stoure, a convenient Seat, on the Stoure. Another, all Market-Towns. 7. Rochester, an antient (but not so large) City, seated on the River Med-way, which is lighed with two Stone-Bridges over it; hath a stately an Episcopal See, and Governed by a Mayor and other Officers. And not far distant from this City is Chatham, seated on the said River, the chief note for being the Station for the Navy-Royal, and where there is a stately Dock for the building and repairing of His Majesties Ships. And not so far distant from this place is the Isle of Shepey, made by the said River Med-way, with, with the sea encompasseth it. It is an Isle of about 20 Miles Circuit, exceeding fertile, and feedeth great Flocks of Sheep, from which it took its name; it is garnished with several Townes, and here is Queenborough Castle built by King Edward the Third, and so called in Honour to his Queen. 8. Maidstone, also seated on the River aforesaid, large, fair, sweet, populous, and well-frequented Market Town, enjoying several Priviledges; and the more frequented, as being a standing place where they keep the Size and Sessions for the County. And so 9. Tenterden so called from its many Springs, of chief note for its healthfull water. Of this County is reckoned the Isle of Thanet, about 8 Miles long, and 7 BROAD, is fertile Soile, and its Inhabitants very Industrious and expert, as well in Maritime Affairs, as in Husbandry. This County is of a large extent, and is divided into 5 Lathes, which are again subdivided into 68 Hundreds, in which are 384 Parishes, of which 17 are Market-Towns.

The Kingdom of the South-SAXONS which contained, the Counties of SURREY and SUSSEX.

SURREY, a County of a different Soile, Large and not over-fertile; neither of a so Gentry, and is replenished with Woods to the chief of which, St. Leonard, St. Martha, the favourite of Canterbury, situate opposite to the City of London, from whence it is severed by the River Thames, but joined together by a stately Stone-Bridge; and is a Member of the City; being so annexed by King Edward the first, but for all it enjoys its several Priviledges specially to itself, Fishing places, which procure called, may be ranked with those that are not only Cities, it very populous, and of a great resort. It is called a fair and well-built Market-Town, well frequented, and full of Inns; it is seated on the River Sull of Martyrs, well frequented, and builds likewise in its Town and on the River Wey, and defended by a Castle, a Fareham; a good Market Town, and 3. divers beyond St. Catherina, and also a large Market Town, seated in a bottom, and 20 divers places, not so much inhabited by Gentry, for the Stock, and of as Cultivate Part of this Noble Isle, there is an also 70 built by the ruin of the Bishop of Surrey, a Free-School for the Education of youth; Kingston, an ancient, famous, large, and well-frequented Market-Town, seated on the Thames, over which it hath a fair and free, upon a Stage, in the open Market-place, Edified, Richmans, were Crowned Kings. 6. Richmond, a fair Town pleasantly seated on the Thames, so in a Town as pleasant and delightful; a (once) stately and magnificent Palace of the Kings, but now reduced to ruins by the late wars, as is also Hampton Court 7. Guildford, another noble Structure of the Kings, two others along the Rivers of Thames into it; and closing to London, and hath several well frequented Towns for Gentry, as Mercers, Drapers, Haberdashers, Wandsworth.